Male humpback whales found in U.S. waters sing complex songs in winter breeding areas in waters near Hawaii, in the Caribbean, and elsewhere that can last up to 20 minutes and be heard miles away.
The blue whale is the largest animal that ever lived and can grow to 90 or more feet and weigh as much as 24 elephants! That’s more than 330,000 pounds (150,000 kg).
Some species of whales are among the longest lived mammals. Scientists estimate bowhead whales (a baleen whale found in the Arctic) can live for more than 200 years, and killer whales (a toothed whale found in various habitats worldwide) can live for more than 100 years.
Killer whales are highly social and often travel in groups that are matrifocal—a family unit focused or centered on the mother. Learn more about the Southern Resident killer whale, a NOAA Fisheries Species in the Spotlight.
Beluga whales have flexible necks, allowing them to move their heads. Their complex communication repertoire of whistles, clicks, and chirps has prompted the nickname “canaries of the sea.” Learn more about the Cook Inlet beluga whale, a NOAA Fisheries Species in the Spotlight.
Gray whales make one of the longest annual migrations of any mammal: they travel about 10,000 miles (16,000 km) round trip!
The minke whale is the smallest baleen whale in North American waters.
North Atlantic right whales gather small organisms near the water surface, straining seawater with their long baleen plates. The whales’ surface feeding behavior and buoyancy make them vulnerable to collisions.
Sperm whales were almost driven to extinction by commercial whalers who sought the whales’ blubber and the unique oil derived from the “spermaceti organ” found in their massive heads. The spermaceti organ is a key part of their echolocation system.with ships.
In 2014, a Cuvier’s beaked whale made the deepest and longest dive ever recorded for a cetacean when it reached a depth of 1.9 miles (2,992 m) and stayed submerged for more than 2 hours.
The accumulated wax inside of a whale’s ear can be used to tell its age as well as any stresses or toxins it may have encountered.
The closest living relative of cetaceans, which includes whales, porpoises and dolphins, are hippos.
The genitals of male whales are actually tucked inside of them when they aren’t mating, this reduces drag and allows them to swim faster.
Whales are born tail first, meaning their head comes out last.
Someone on a server Zeph and Li use to mod posted a whale dick.
Adult narwhals have only two teeth. In most males, the right tooth stays in the skull, while the left one forms a spiral that can extend over three meters.
The largest animal ever known to have lived on earth, the blue whale, eats krill, tiny shrimp-like animals about the size of a jelly bean.
Whales sleep with one brain hemisphere at a time, which allows them to continue coming to the surface to breathe. There is still a lot of things we don’t know about the sleeping patterns of whales. One new observation has shown that sperm whales sometimes sleep vertically with their noses out of the water.
The narwhal tusk—most commonly found on males—is actually an enlarged tooth with sensory capability and up to 10 million nerve endings inside. Some narwhals have up to two tusks, while others have none. The spiraled tusk juts from the head and can grow as long at 10 feet.
Unlike some whale species that migrate, narwhals spend their lives in the Arctic waters of Canada, Greenland, Norway and Russia. Most narwhals winter for up to five months under sea ice in the Baffin Bay-Davis Strait area.
Oil and gas development and climate change pose threats to narwhals. Increased development means more shipping vessels, creating more opportunities for collisions and more underwater noise that can interfere with communication among the whales. WWF helps raise awareness of and address the threat of noise pollution on narwhals and other whales.
Narwhals feed on Greenland halibut, Arctic and polar cod, squid and shrimp. They do their chomping at the ice floe edge and in the ice-free summer waters.
Narwhals can dive about a mile deep in the ocean. Cracks in the sea ice above allow them to pop up for air when they need it.
Narwhals change color as they age. Newborns are a blue-gray, juveniles are blue-black and adults are a mottled gray. Old narwhals are nearly all white.
Scientists learn about the movements of narwhals through satellite tracking, by tracking the paths of narwhals during their annual feeding and reproductive routines to better understand the species.
Beluga whales can move their heads around because they don't have fused neckbones like other whales do. They also have expressive faces, and their pale skin makes them more likely to show scarring.
Sperm whales dive as deep as 3,280 feet in search of squid. These graceful giants hold their breath for up to 90 minutes when making that dive.
It was long thought that beluga whales were shallow divers, but years of tracking them has found that they will dive up to 3,000 feet in search of food.
Gray whales migrate up to 10,000 miles a year, from the warm waters of Baja California to their feeding grounds in the Bering Sea.
Whales are the largest animals on Earth and they live in every ocean. The massive mammals range from the 600-pound dwarf sperm whale to the colossal blue whale, which can weigh more than 200 tons and stretch up to 100 feet long—almost as long as a professional basketball court.
Whales are warm-blooded creatures that nurse their young.
There are two types of whales: toothed and baleen. Toothed whales, as the name suggests, have teeth, which are used to hunt and eat squid, fish, and seals. Toothed whales include sperm whales, as well as dolphins, porpoises, and orcas, among others. The narwhal’s “horn” is actually one long tooth protruding through its lip.
Baleen whales are larger than toothed whales, for the most part. They include blue whales, humpbacks, right whales, bowhead whales, and others. They feed by straining tiny shrimp-like creatures called krill through the fringed plates of long, fingernail-like material called baleen attached to their upper jaws.
Whales, particularly humpbacks, produce otherworldly vocalizations that can be heard for miles underwater. The songs, complex combinations of moans, howls, and cries that can continue for hours, are produced when whales push air around in their heads, then amplify the sounds through a blob of fat that perches on the top jaw. It’s thought that whales communicate through the calls, which researchers believe can be heard for thousands of miles.
Though the stark population declines from hunting have largely stopped, several whale species are threatened or endangered—including the blue whale, right whale, and fin whale—by a combination of fishing net entanglements and being struck by ships.
Humpback whales in the Southern Hemisphere live off their fat reserves for 5.5-7.5 months each year, as they migrate from their tropical breeding grounds to the Antarctic, to feed on krill.​ 
All toothed whales have a ‘melon’ in their foreheads. It’s a mass of tissue which focuses the whales’ calls, vital for communication and echolocation.​ Like bats, they use this echolocation to "see". 
Some whales bubble net feed,this involves whales cooperatively blowing bubbles that encircle their prey. As the prey won't cross through the bubbles, they're trapped, making it easy for the whales to eat them.​ 
It's estimated that there were over 225,000 Antarctic blue whales before their exploitation - today there are less than 3,000.​
Over 80% of North Atlantic right whales have been entangled in fishing gear at least once during their lifetime - they often get caught many times in their lives.  
The name 'narwhal' comes from old Norse, it means "corpse whale" as their skin colour resembles that of a drowned sailor.  
The Antarctic blue whale can consume about 3,600kg of krill a day
Killer whales aren’t actually whales,despite being known as 'killer whales', orcas are actually the largest species of dolphin!
Blue whales are pregnant for 10-12 months. The newborn calf is about 7.5 m long and weighs about 5.5 to 7.3 tonnes
A baby blue whale drinks about 225 litres of its mother's fat-laden milk
A Cuvier's beaked whale has been recorded to dive to a depth of 3km for over 2 hours.
Sperm whales are champion divers. Adults can stay underwater for almost two hours and dive to depths of 2,000 metres
The sperm whale's huge head, which is up to a third of its overall body length, houses the heaviest brain in the animal kingdom - up to 9kg. 
A sperm whale's head also consists of a cavity large enough to park a car inside that contains a yellowish wax called spermaceti.
The bowhead whale, which lives exclusively in the Arctic, has the thickest blubber of all cetaceans. It can reach a whopping 70cm in thickness. 
The southern right whale has the largest testes in the animal kingdom each pair weighing around a tonne.
An individual fin whale pees about 970 litres per day. 
Beluga whales are called the "canaries of the sea" because they make sounds like the little yellow birds. 
Sperm whales make the loudest sounds. They have been recorded making a noise at 230 decibels. 
Blue whales are also very loud. Their call reaches levels up to 188 decibels and can be heard hundreds of miles away. A jet in comparison reaches only 140 decibels.
Blue Whales are graceful swimmers cruise the ocean at over 8km/h, and can reach speeds of over 30km/h.
Blue Whales mainly catch their food by diving, and descend to depths of approximately 500 m.
Blue whales have few predators but are known to fall victim to attacks by sharks and killer whales, and many are injured or die each year from impacts with large ships.
Although the blue whale is a deep-water hunter, as a mammal, it must come to the surface of the sea to breathe. When it surfaces, it exhales air out of a blowhole in a cloud of pressurized vapour that rises vertically above the water for up to 9m.
Females breed only once every three years and gestation is between 11-12months. Females usually only have one young.
Blue whales occasionally swim in small groups but usually swim alone or in pairs. They are thought to form close attachments.
Intensive hunting in the 1900s by whalers seeking whale oil drove Blue Whales to the brink of extinction. Hundreds of thousands of whales were killed.
Whales are part of the ‘cetacea’ family as they have fins, flukes and blowholes.
The term ‘whale’ often excludes dolphins and porpoises.
Whale blubber stores energy and insulates the body, keeping them alive through harsh winters.
Baleen whales have two blowholes, whereas the toothed whales have only one.
Whales live in families, known as pods.
Breaching or cresting the surface of the ocean can be seen as signs of courting, danger, dominance and play.
When a whale slaps its fluke (tail) against the water, this is to scare smaller fish, as it forages for food.
Whales feature heavily in religion and mythology. The most famous is Jonas who was eaten by a whale.
Every single ocean on Earth is a whale habitat.
Whales are descendants of the Artiodactyl, a land-living dinosaur species.
Sperm whales rely heavily on echolocation due to their eyes’ inability to swivel in the sockets.
There are 79 to 84 different species of whale. They came in many different shapes and sizes!
A baby whale is called a calf. Whales form groups to look after calves and feed together. These groups are often made up of all female or all male whales.
Whales that are found in both Northern and Southern hemisphere never meet or breed together. Their migration is timed so that they are never in breeding areas at the same time.
Sometimes whales make navigation mistakes during migrations. Although they may have made the mistake days before, they don’t realise it until they becoming stranded.
Whales support many different types of life. Several creatures, such as barnacles and sea lice, attach themselves to the skin of whales and live there.
Orcas are found in oceans worldwide. They are most abundant in the Arctic and Antarctic and in areas of cold-water upwelling.
An extended clan of orcas, known as the Southern Resident Orca community, socialize and forage in the inland waters of Washington State and British Columbia. Both male and female offspring remain with their mothers their entire lives
Orcas are carnivorous (meat-eating) predators. They primarily prey upon marine mammals such as seals, sea lions, and even whales
They do not eat during their migration. All they do is swim and rest for short periods of time. Sometimes, when whales are migrating, they swim very close to the shore and can be seen “blowing” and jumping out of the water. This jumping is called “breaching.
When whales sleep, they stay at the top of the water, with their blowhole above the surface. Sometimes, a whale will swim up to the surface of the water and quickly blow air out of their blowhole, making a fountain of watery mist, called a “blow.”
Whales don't actually have ears, but they can still hear. Instead, they have structures in their jawbones that allow them to hear sounds
The unique texture of a grey whale are actually parasites — their bodies are covered with them, making them appear as a "crusty ocean rock." 
Blue Whales have a long, stream-lined body, a wide head, huge flippers, a powerful tail and a small dorsal fin. Some individuals have a yellowy-coloured underside, giving rise to the nickname ‘sulphur bottom’ whales.
Blue whales can be found in all of our planet’s oceans, except the Arctic.